Write a readme on Multi-GPU usage in llama.cpp (#22729)
ggml-org/llama.cpp: docs/multi-gpu.md

| `-mg` | `--main-gpu` | integer device index | `0` | The single GPU used in `--split-mode none`. |
| `-ngl` | `--n-gpu-layers` / `--gpu-layers` | integer \| `auto` \| `all` | `auto` | Maximum number of layers to keep in VRAM. Use `999` or `all` to push everything possible to the GPUs. |
| `-dev` | `--device` | comma-separated device names, or `none` | auto | Restrict which devices llama.cpp may use. See `--list-devices` for names. |
| | `--list-devices` | - | - | Print the available devices and their memory. Run this first to learn the names you'd pass to `--device`. |
| `-fa` | `--flash-attn` | `on` \| `off` \| `auto` | `auto` | Required when using `--split-mode tensor` and/or quantized V cache. Supported (and therefore enabled by default) for most combinations of models and backends. |
| `-ctk` | `--cache-type-k` | `f32` \| `f16` \| `bf16` \| `q8_0` \| `q4_0` \| ... | `f16` | KV cache type for K. |
| `-ctv` | `--cache-type-v` | same as `-ctk` | `f16` | KV cache type for V. |
| `-fit` | `--fit` | `on` \| `off` | `on` | Auto-fit unset args to device memory. **Not supported with `tensor`. You may need to manually set the `--ctx-size` to make the model fit.**  |

> As for any CUDA prgoram, the environment variable `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES` can be used to control which GPUs to use for the CUDA backend: if you set it, llama.cpp only sees the specified GPUs. Use `--device` for selecting GPUs from among those visible to llama.cpp, this works for any backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As for any CUDA program, the environment variable `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES` can be used to control which GPUs to use for the CUDA backend: if you set it, llama.cpp only sees the specified GPUs. Use `--device` for selecting GPUs from among those visible to llama.cpp, this works for any backend.
```

---

## Recipes

### 1. Default - pipeline parallel across all visible GPUs

```bash
llama-cli -m model.gguf
llama-server -m model.gguf
```

Easiest configuration. KV cache spreads across the GPUs along with the layers. `--fit` (on by default) sizes things automatically.

### 2. Pipeline parallel with a custom split ratio

```bash
llama-cli -m model.gguf -ts 3,1
```

Useful when GPUs have different memory: GPU 0 (3 parts) and GPU 1 (1 part). Proportions are normalized so `-ts 3,1` is the same as e.g. `-ts 75,25`.

### 3. Single-GPU mode, picking a specific GPU

```bash
llama-cli --list-devices
llama-cli -m model.gguf -dev CUDA1
```

Use only the device listed as `CUDA1` when calling with `--list-devices`.

> ### 4. Tensor parallelism - TENSOR mode (experimental)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4. Tensor parallelism (experimental)
```

```bash
llama-cli -m model.gguf -sm tensor -ctk f16 -ctv f16
```

- `--flash-attn off` or (`--flash-attn auto` resolving to `off` when it isn't supported) is a hard error.
- KV cache types must be non-quantized: `f32`, `f16`, or `bf16`. Support for quantized KV cache is not implemented and trying to use it will result in an error.
- Mark this configuration as experimental in your tooling: validate output quality before deploying.

> - TENSOR mode is not implemented for all architectures. The following will fail with *"LLAMA_SPLIT_MODE_TENSOR not implemented for architecture '...'"*; fall back to `--split-mode layer`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--split-mode tensor`is not implemented for all architectures. The following will fail with *"LLAMA_SPLIT_MODE_TENSOR not implemented for architecture '...'"*:
```

Looking at the code again, if a model arch is not supported it i an error rather than a fallback to `-sm layer`.

  - **MoE / hybrid:** Grok, MPT, OLMoE, DeepSeek2, GLM-DSA, Nemotron-H, Nemotron-H-MoE, Granite-Hybrid, LFM2-MoE, Minimax-M2, Mistral4, Kimi-Linear, Jamba, Falcon-H1
  - **State-space / RWKV-style:** Mamba, Mamba2 (and the hybrid Mamba-attention models above)
  - **Other:** PLAMO2, MiniCPM3, Gemma-3n, OLMo2, BitNet, T5

### 5. With NCCL

There's no runtime flag for NCCL - it's selected at build time (`-DGGML_CUDA_NCCL=ON`, this is the default). Note that NCCL is **not** automatically distributed with CUDA and you may need to install it manually - when in doubt check the CMake log to see whether or not it can find the package. When llama.cpp is compiled with NCCL support it uses it automatically for cross-GPU reductions in `tensor` mode. When NCCL is missing on a multi-GPU build, you'll see this one-time warning and performance will be lower:

```
NVIDIA Collective Communications Library (NCCL) is unavailable, multi GPU performance will be suboptimal
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

When using the "ROCm" backend (which is the ggml CUDA code translated for AMD via HIP), the AMD equivalent RCCL can be used by compiling with `-DGGML_HIP_RCCL=ON`. Note that RCCL is by default *disabled* because (unlike NCCL) it was not universally beneficial during testing.
```

# Using multiple GPUs with llama.cpp

This guide explains how to run [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp) across more than one GPU. It covers the split modes, the command-line flags that control them, the limitations you need to know about, and ready-to-use recipes for `llama-cli` and `llama-server`.

> The same flags work in both tools - they share `common/arg.cpp`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CLI arguments listed here are the same for both tools - or most llama.cpp binaries for that matter.
```

Not all CLI arguments defined in `common/arg.cpp` are enabled for all binaries. Also I would drop a reference to the source file since it's not relevant from the perspective of an end user.

---

## When you need multi-GPU

Reach for multi-GPU when one of these is true:

> - **The model doesn't fit in a single GPU's VRAM.** Spread the weights across two or more GPUs so the whole model can stay on accelerators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **The model doesn't fit in a single GPU's VRAM.** By spreading the weights across two or more GPUs the whole model can stay on accelerators. Otherwise part of the model will need to be run off of the comparatively slower system RAM.
```

> - **You want more throughput.** Distributing computation across GPUs can reduce per-token latency or lift batch throughput, depending on the split mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **You want more throughput.** By distributing the computation across multiple GPUs, each individual GPU has to do less work. This can result in better prefill and/or token generation performance, depending on the split mode and interconnect speed vs. the speed of an individual GPU.
```

---

## The split modes

Set with `--split-mode` / `-sm`.

| Mode | What it does | When to use |
|---|---|---|
| `none` | Use a single GPU only. Pick which one with `--main-gpu`. | You explicitly want to confine the model to one GPU even though more are visible. |

> | `layer` (**default**) | Pipeline parallelism. Each GPU holds a contiguous slice of layers. The KV cache for layer *l* lives on the GPU that owns layer *l*. | Default and most compatible multi-GPU choice. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `layer` (**default**) | Pipeline parallelism. Each GPU holds a contiguous slice of layers. The KV cache for layer *l* lives on the GPU that owns layer *l*. | Default and most compatible multi-GPU choice. You want more memory than a single GPU provides and your priority is a fast prefill. Can tolerate slow interconnect speeds between GPUs. |
```

> | `row` | **Deprecated.** Older row-split tensor-parallel path. Superseded by `tensor`. Avoid in new deployments. | Not recommended. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `row` | **Deprecated.** Older row-split tensor-parallel path with comparatively poor performance. Splits only dense weights across GPUs. Superseded by `tensor` which should be universally superior if it can be used. | Avoid in new deployments. |
```

> | `tensor` | **EXPERIMENTAL.** Tensor parallelism that splits both weights *and* KV across the participating GPUs via a "meta device" abstraction. | If you want true TP including KV distribution and your model architecture is supported (see limitations below). Treat as experimental - verify correctness on your model before relying on it. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `tensor` | **EXPERIMENTAL.** Tensor parallelism that splits both weights *and* KV across the participating GPUs via a "meta device" abstraction. | You want more memory than a single GPU provides and your priority is fast token generation. Prefill speeds approach pipeline parallel speeds for large, dense models and fast GPU interconnect speeds. Treat as experimental as the code is less mature than pipeline parallelism. Performance should be good for multiple NVIDIA GPUs using the CUDA backend, no guarantees otherwise. |
```

> > Pipeline parallel (`layer`) vs. tensor parallel (`tensor`): pipeline-parallel runs different layers on different GPUs and processes tokens sequentially through the pipeline. Tensor-parallel splits each layer across GPUs and does cross-GPU reductions inside every layer. Pipeline-parallel maximizes batch throughput; tensor-parallel can reduce single-token latency but adds communication on every layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Pipeline parallel (`layer`) vs. tensor parallel (`tensor`): pipeline-parallel runs different layers on different GPUs and processes tokens sequentially through the pipeline. This minimizes data transfers between GPUs but requires many tokens to scale well. Tensor-parallel splits each layer across GPUs and does multiple cross-GPU reductions per layer. This enables parallelizing any workload but is much more bottlenecked by the GPU interconnect speed. Pipeline-parallel maximizes batch throughput; tensor-parallel minimizes latency.
```

---

> ## Command-line flags reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Command-line arguments reference
```

| Short | Long | Value | Default | Notes |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `-sm` | `--split-mode` | `none` \| `layer` \| `tensor` | `layer` | See modes above. |

> | `-ts` | `--tensor-split` | comma-separated proportions, e.g. `3,1` | mode-dependent | How much of the model goes to each GPU. If omitted, `layer`/`row` use automatic memory-based splitting, while `tensor` splits tensor segments evenly. With `3,1` on two GPUs, GPU 0 gets 75 %, GPU 1 gets 25 %. The values follow the order in `--device`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-ts` | `--tensor-split` | comma-separated proportions, e.g. `3,1` | mode-dependent | How much of the model goes to each GPU. If omitted, `layer`/`row` use automatic splitting proportional to memory, while `tensor` splits tensor segments evenly. With `3,1` on two GPUs, GPU 0 gets 75 %, GPU 1 gets 25 %. The values follow the order in `--device`. |
```

| `-mg` | `--main-gpu` | integer device index | `0` | The single GPU used in `--split-mode none`. |
| `-ngl` | `--n-gpu-layers` / `--gpu-layers` | integer \| `auto` \| `all` | `auto` | Maximum number of layers to keep in VRAM. Use `999` or `all` to push everything possible to the GPUs. |
| `-dev` | `--device` | comma-separated device names, or `none` | auto | Restrict which devices llama.cpp may use. See `--list-devices` for names. |
| | `--list-devices` | - | - | Print the available devices and their memory. Run this first to learn the names you'd pass to `--device`. |

> | `-fa` | `--flash-attn` | `on` \| `off` \| `auto` | `auto` | Required by `--split-mode tensor`. Recommended whenever you also use quantized V cache. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-fa` | `--flash-attn` | `on` \| `off` \| `auto` | `auto` | Required when using `--split-mode tensor` and/or quantized V cache. Supported (and therefore enabled by default) for most combinations of models and backends. |
```

| `-ctk` | `--cache-type-k` | `f32` \| `f16` \| `bf16` \| `q8_0` \| `q4_0` \| ... | `f16` | KV cache type for K. |

> | `-ctv` | `--cache-type-v` | same as `-ctk` | `f16` | KV cache type for V. Quantized V requires `-fa on`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-ctv` | `--cache-type-v` | same as `-ctk` | `f16` | KV cache type for V. |
```

> | `-fit` | `--fit` | `on` \| `off` | `on` | Auto-fit unset args to device memory. **Not supported with `tensor`** - set `-fit off` for that mode. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `-fit` | `--fit` | `on` \| `off` | `on` | Auto-fit unset args to device memory. **Not supported with `tensor`. You may need to manually set the `--ctx-size` to make the model fit.**  |
```

> `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES` is honored implicitly through CUDA itself: if you set it, llama.cpp only sees the GPUs CUDA exposes. Use `--device` for finer control across multiple backends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As for any CUDA prgoram, the environment variable `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES` can be used to control which GPUs to use for the CUDA backend: if you set it, llama.cpp only sees the specified GPUs. Use `--device` for selecting GPUs from among those visible to llama.cpp, this works for any backend.
```

---

## Recipes

### 1. Default - pipeline parallel across all visible GPUs

```bash
llama-cli   -m model.gguf -ngl all

> llama-server -m model.gguf -ngl all --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080

Reviewer: ```suggestion
llama-cli -m model.gguf
llama-server -m model.gguf
```

I would say to omit `-ngl all` as the default should work correctly for most setups. The host set here is not the default and should I think be omitted as it exposes the llama.cpp server to the network. For server-specific instructions it makes I think more sense to link the server documentation.

```

Easiest configuration. KV cache spreads across the GPUs along with the layers. `--fit` (on by default) sizes things automatically.

### 2. Pipeline parallel with a custom split ratio

```bash

> llama-cli -m model.gguf -ngl all -sm layer -ts 3,1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
llama-cli -m model.gguf -ts 3,1
```

```

> Useful when GPUs have different memory: GPU 0 (3 parts) and GPU 1 (1 part). Proportions are normalized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Useful when GPUs have different memory: GPU 0 (3 parts) and GPU 1 (1 part). Proportions are normalized so `-ts 3,1` is the same as e.g. `-ts 75,25`.
```

### 3. Single-GPU mode, picking a specific GPU

```bash

> llama-cli -m model.gguf -ngl all -sm none -mg 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
llama-cli --list-devices
llama-cli -m model.gguf -dev CUDA1
```

```

> Use only device index 1, even if more GPUs are visible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use only the device listed as `CUDA1` when calling with `--list-devices`.
```

### 4. Tensor parallelism - TENSOR mode (experimental)

```bash

> llama-cli -m model.gguf -ngl all -sm tensor -fa on -ctk f16 -ctv f16 -fit off

Reviewer: ```suggestion
llama-cli -m model.gguf -sm tensor -ctk f16 -ctv f16
```

```

> - `--flash-attn on` is **mandatory**. Setting it to `auto` is fine (it gets upgraded automatically); setting it to `off` is a hard error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `--flash-attn off` or (`--flash-attn auto` resolving to `off` when it isn't supported) is a hard error.
```

> - KV cache types must be non-quantized: `f32`, `f16`, or `bf16`. Quantized KV cache will refuse to start with this mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- KV cache types must be non-quantized: `f32`, `f16`, or `bf16`. Support for quantized KV cache is not implemented and trying to use it will result in an error.
```

- `-fit off` because auto-fit isn't implemented for `tensor`.

> - The model architecture must be on the allow-list - see limitations below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Mark this configuration as experimental in your tooling: validate output quality before deploying.

### 5. Restricting which GPUs participate

```bash
llama-cli --list-devices
# CUDA0: NVIDIA RTX A6000 (48 GiB)
# CUDA1: NVIDIA RTX 4090 (24 GiB)
# CUDA2: NVIDIA RTX 4090 (24 GiB)

llama-cli -m model.gguf -ngl all -sm tensor -dev CUDA0,CUDA2 -fa on -fit off
```

You can also use `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0,2 llama-cli ...` to do this at the CUDA layer.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think this section is redundant.

### 6. With NCCL

> There's no runtime flag for NCCL - it's selected at build time (`-DGGML_CUDA_NCCL=ON`). When NCCL is compiled in and the system has it installed, llama.cpp uses it automatically for cross-GPU reductions in `tensor` mode. When NCCL is missing on a multi-GPU build, you'll see this one-time warning at startup and performance will be lower:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's no runtime flag for NCCL - it's selected at build time (`-DGGML_CUDA_NCCL=ON`, this is the default). Note that NCCL is **not** automatically distributed with CUDA and you may need to install it manually - when in doubt check the CMake log to see whether or not it can find the package. When llama.cpp is compiled with NCCL support it uses it automatically for cross-GPU reductions in `tensor` mode. When NCCL is missing on a multi-GPU build, you'll see this one-time warning and performance will be lower:
```

- **SYCL** - supports `none` and `layer`.
- **Metal, Vulkan, CANN, etc.** - each backend exposes its own set of devices; multi-device support varies. `layer` is the most portable choice across backends.

---

## Handling OOM with `--fit off`

`--fit off` (required for `--split-mode tensor`) disables the auto-fitter, so llama.cpp will not shrink anything to make the model fit. If you OOM at startup or during inference, you have to reduce memory pressure yourself. The knobs below are listed roughly from least to most disruptive - try them in order.

1. **Lower `--ctx-size`.** The KV cache is roughly proportional to `n_ctx`. Halving `-c` halves the KV cache. Pick a context size you actually need rather than the model maximum.

2. **For `llama-server`: lower `--parallel`.** `-np N` allocates a slot KV cache for every concurrent sequence; total KV memory ≈ `n_ctx × n_parallel`. The default is often higher than you need.

3. **Reduce `--n-gpu-layers`.** Last performance-preserving knob: offload fewer layers (e.g. `-ngl 30` instead of `all`). The remaining layers run on CPU and inference will be **much slower** - only do this when no other knob suffices.

> ---

Reviewer: Move the model list upwards but otherwise I would say to remove this section since it is redundant.

Author: Fixed. Moved the model list above and OOM issues to the troubleshooting section.

> ## Diagnosing problems

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Troubleshooting
```

> | Symptom | Likely cause |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Symptom | How to fix |
```

|---|---|
| Startup error *"SPLIT_MODE_TENSOR requires flash_attn to be enabled"* | Add `-fa on` or remove `-fa off`. |
| Startup error *"simultaneous use of SPLIT_MODE_TENSOR and KV cache quantization not implemented"* | Use `-ctk f16 -ctv f16` (or `bf16`/`f32`) with `--split-mode tensor`. |
| Startup error *"LLAMA_SPLIT_MODE_TENSOR not implemented for architecture 'X'"* | Architecture not on the TENSOR allow-list. Use `--split-mode layer`. |

> | Warning *"NCCL is unavailable, multi GPU performance will be suboptimal"* | llama.cpp wasn't built with NCCL. Either accept the lower performance or rebuild with `-DGGML_CUDA_NCCL=ON`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Warning *"NCCL is unavailable, multi GPU performance will be suboptimal"* | llama.cpp wasn't built with NCCL. Either accept the lower performance or install NCCL and rebuild. |
```

> | CUDA OOM at startup or during prefill in `--split-mode tensor` | Auto-fit is disabled in this mode. See "Handling OOM with `--fit off`" above for the order in which to lower `-c`, `-np`, `-ngl`, etc. |

Reviewer: Make the solution here explicit instead of referencing the other section.

Author: Fixed.

> | Performance is worse with multi-GPU than single-GPU | Inter-GPU bandwidth is the bottleneck. Try `--split-mode layer` (less communication than `tensor`), and verify that NCCL is being used. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Performance is worse with multi-GPU than single-GPU | The performance is bottlenecked by GPU interconnect speed. For `--split-mode tensor`, verify that NCCL is being used. Try `--split-mode layer` (less communication than `tensor`). Increase GPU interconnect speed via more PCIe lanes or e.g. NVLink (if available). |
```

> | GPU not used at all | `--n-gpu-layers` is `0` or too low - set `-ngl all`. Or your build doesn't include the relevant backend. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| GPU not used at all | `--n-gpu-layers` is `0` or too low - try explicitly setting `-ngl all`. Or you are accidentally hiding the GPUs via an environment variable like `CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=-1`. Or your build doesn't include support for the relevant backend. |
```
